Add docs for Disk Spill Due To Low work_mem (#399)
pganalyze/pganalyze-docs: query-advisor/insights/disk-spill-work-mem.mdx

---
title: 'Disk Spill Due To Low work_mem'
backlink_href: /docs/query-advisor/insights
backlink_title: 'Query Advisor Insights'
---

Query Advisor detects when a Sort or Hash operation in your query exceeds the available `work_mem` and
spills intermediate data to temporary files on disk, which is significantly slower than processing
the same data in memory.

## The problem

When a Sort or Hash node cannot fit its working set within `work_mem`, Postgres falls back to writing
intermediate results to temporary files. Reading and writing those files adds I/O overhead that often

> dominates the runtime of the query, even on fast storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slows down the query, even on fast storage.
```

(whether it dominates the query or not is not guaranteed, e.g. you might have a very slow index scan that's entirely unrelated to a hash/sort spilling)

Reviewer 2: I felt the "often" qualifier addressed that for this level of detail, but fair point.

### Example scenario

<CodeBlock language="sql">
{`SELECT customer_id, COUNT(*)
FROM orders
GROUP BY customer_id
ORDER BY COUNT(*) DESC;`}
</CodeBlock>

In `EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, BUFFERS)` output, a spilling Sort node looks like this:

<CodeBlock language="text">
{`Sort  (cost=... rows=... width=...) (actual time=... rows=...)
  Sort Key: (count(*)) DESC
  Sort Method: external merge  Disk: 11456kB
  Buffers: shared hit=54504 dirtied=2, temp read=32453 written=32552`}
</CodeBlock>

The `Sort Method: external merge` and the `temp read`/`temp written` buffers are the signal that the
node spilled. A Hash node spills similarly, falling back to batched processing once it runs out of
memory.

## How Query Advisor helps

> When Query Advisor detects a disk spill, it surfaces the actual size of the spilled data, the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Query Advisor detects a disk spill, it surfaces the amount of temporary file writes, the current
```

Reviewer 2: Not a big deal, but I think this wording is less clear: is "amount" talking about bytes or the number of writes? If we want to be more accurate, maybe we should say "...surfaces the size in bytes of temporary files written to disk"?

`work_mem` setting on the server, and a recommended target value. The recommended target is bounded
by a safe ceiling computed from the server's total memory, `shared_buffers`, and typical active
connection count, so the suggestion leaves headroom for normal load.

### Typical optimization approach

The fix is to give the operation enough `work_mem` to stay in memory. Where you apply the change
matters: a one-off investigation should not alter the server-wide default, and a recurring workload
should not depend on a per-session `SET`.

> Query Advisor presents three scopes, from narrowest to broadest:

Author: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: ?

Reviewer: I suggested to Keiko 1:1 that we drop this, since its an LLM-ism to use lists like this, and I felt it didn't contribute to the text.

<CodeBlock language="sql">
{`SET work_mem = '128MB';
SELECT customer_id, COUNT(*)
FROM orders
GROUP BY customer_id
ORDER BY COUNT(*) DESC;
RESET work_mem;`}
</CodeBlock>

**2. Per query, using `pg_hint_plan`.** If the [`pg_hint_plan`](https://github.com/ossc-db/pg_hint_plan)
extension is installed, you can raise `work_mem` for a single statement by prefixing it with a `Set`
hint comment. Other queries on the same connection are unaffected.

<CodeBlock language="sql">
{`/*+ Set(work_mem "128MB") */
SELECT customer_id, COUNT(*)
FROM orders
GROUP BY customer_id
ORDER BY COUNT(*) DESC;`}
</CodeBlock>

**3. Persistently, scoped to a database, role, or the whole server.** When the higher value is needed
for a recurring workload, scope it as narrowly as you can. Per-database or per-role overrides keep
unrelated workloads on the previous default.

<CodeBlock language="sql">
{`ALTER DATABASE mydb SET work_mem = '128MB';
-- or
ALTER ROLE myrole SET work_mem = '128MB';`}
</CodeBlock>

To raise the server-wide default instead, update `work_mem` in your Postgres configuration (the
parameter group or configuration UI provided by your managed Postgres service, or `postgresql.conf`

> for self-managed servers) and reload the configuration.

Reviewer 2: We may want to mention `ALTER SYSTEM`.

> for self-managed servers) and reload the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/ `ALTER SYSTEM` for self-managed servers) and reload the configuration.
```
